Update changelog (#3719)
PennyLaneAI/pennylane: doc/releases/changelog-dev.md

  H =  2 * XX + f1 * YY + f2 * ZZ
  ```

  ```pycon
  >>> H
  ParametrizedHamiltonian: terms=3
  >>> params = [1.2, [2.3, 3.4]]
  >>> H(params, t=0.5)
  (2*(PauliX(wires=[1]) @ PauliX(wires=[1]))) + ((-0.2876553535461426*(PauliY(wires=[0]) @ PauliY(wires=[0]))) + (1.5179612636566162*(PauliZ(wires=[0]) @ PauliZ(wires=[1]))))
  ```

  The time-dependent Hamiltonian can be used within a circuit with `qml.evolve`:

  ```python
  def pulse_circuit(params, time):
      qml.Hadamard(0)
      qml.evolve(H)(params, time)
      return qml.expval(qml.PauliX(0) @ qml.PauliZ(1))
  ```

  Pulse-based circuits can be executed on the `default.qubit` simulator using JAX as an interface:

  ```pycon
  >>> dev = dev = qml.device("default.qubit", wires=2)
  >>> qnode = qml.QNode(pulse_circuit, dev, interface="jax")
  >>> qnode(params, time=0.5)
  Array(-0.5383645, dtype=float32)
  >>> jax.grad(qnode)(params, time=0.5)
  [Array(-4.980595e-09, dtype=float32),
   [Array(-0.7838294, dtype=float32, weak_type=True),
    Array(0.07700024, dtype=float32, weak_type=True)]]
  ```

<h4>Special unitary operation 🌞</h4>

* A new operation `SpecialUnitary` was added, providing access to an arbitrary

>   unitary gate via a parametrization in the Pauli basis.

Author: Right, we already have `QubitUnitary` for users who already have a unitary matrix at hand. `SpecialUnitary` is a parametrization that lets you smoothly move between all SU(N), and we provide a hardware-friendly gradient.

  (2*(PauliX(wires=[1]) @ PauliX(wires=[1]))) + ((-0.2876553535461426*(PauliY(wires=[0]) @ PauliY(wires=[0]))) + (1.5179612636566162*(PauliZ(wires=[0]) @ PauliZ(wires=[1]))))
  ```

  In addition, a new `qml.dot` function has been added so that a `ParametrizedHamiltonian` can be constructed via a list of coefficients and operators:
  
  ```pycon
  >>> coeffs = np.array([1.1, 2.2])
  >>> ops = [qml.PauliX(0), qml.PauliY(0)]
  >>> qml.dot(coeffs, ops)
  (1.1*(PauliX(wires=[0]))) + (2.2*(PauliY(wires=[0])))
  >>> qml.dot(coeffs, ops, pauli=True)
  1.1 * X(0) + 2.2 * Y(0)
  ```

  Other features for `ParameterizedHamiltonian` include:

  - Time evolution via `qml.evolve`, which creates a `ParametrizedEvolution` object:
  
    ```python
    >>> coeffs = [lambda p, t: p * t for _ in range(4)]
    >>> ops = [qml.PauliX(i) for i in range(4)]
    >>> H = qml.dot(coeffs, ops)
    >>> qml.evolve(H)
    ParametrizedEvolution(wires=[0, 1, 2, 3])
    ```

>   - Added `pwc` as a convenience function for defining a `ParametrizedHamiltonian`.

Reviewer: What does `pwc` stand for 🤔? Overall, these two features for `ParameterizedHamiltonian`s are a little confusing.

Author: They've been moved down to improvements. `pwc` is piecewise constant.

  This operation can be differentiated with hardware-compatible methods like parameter shifts
  and it supports parameter broadcasting/batching, but not both at the same time.

<h4>Always differentiable 📈</h4>

> * The Hadamard test gradient tranform is now available via `qml.gradients.hadamard_grad`.

Author: ```suggestion
* The Hadamard test gradient transform is now available via `qml.gradients.hadamard_grad`.
```

  This operation can be differentiated with hardware-compatible methods like parameter shifts
  and it supports parameter broadcasting/batching, but not both at the same time.

<h4>Always differentiable 📈</h4>

* The Hadamard test gradient transform is now available via `qml.gradients.hadamard_grad`.

>   [#3625](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3625)

Author: ```suggestion
  [(#3625)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3625)
```

  ```

* The gradient transform `qml.gradients.spsa_grad` is now registered as a
  differentiation method for QNodes.

>   [#3440](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3440)

Author: ```suggestion
  [(#3440)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3440)
```

  optional batching was added, allowing for the following:
  
  ```python
  dev = qml.device('default.qubit', wires=2, shots=(100, 100))
  @qml.qnode(dev)
  def circuit(x1, x2):
      qml.templates.AngleEmbedding(x1, wires=dev.wires)
      qml.adjoint(qml.templates.AngleEmbedding)(x2, wires=dev.wires)
      return qml.probs(wires=dev.wires)

  kernel = lambda x1, x2: circuit(x1, x2)[:, 0]
  ```

  Note that we extract the first probability vector entry for both
  evaluations using 100 shots each.
  We can then compute the kernel matrix on a set of 4 (random) feature
  vectors ``X`` but using two sets of 100 shots each via

  ```pycon
  >>> X = np.random.random((4, 2))
  >>> qml.kernels.square_kernel_matrix(X, kernel)
  tensor([[[1.  , 0.86, 0.88, 0.92],
           [0.86, 1.  , 0.75, 0.97],
           [0.88, 0.75, 1.  , 0.91],
           [0.92, 0.97, 0.91, 1.  ]],

          [[1.  , 0.93, 0.91, 0.92],
           [0.93, 1.  , 0.8 , 1.  ],
           [0.91, 0.8 , 1.  , 0.91],
           [0.92, 1.  , 0.91, 1.  ]]], requires_grad=True)
  ```

<h4>Smartly decompose Hamiltonian evolution 💯</h4>

To be merged this week

<h4>Tools for quantum chemistry and other applications 🛠️</h4>

> * A new method called `qml.qchem.givens_decomposition` has been added, which decomposes a unitary into a sequence

Author: > In the next line, line 267, can we just say
>
> >  of Givens rotation gates.
>
> ?

I'm not sure, looking [here](https://docs.pennylane.ai/en/latest/code/api/pennylane.qchem.givens_decomposition.html?highlight=givens) I would read the sentence as 

> Decompose a unitary into (a sequence of Givens rotation gates with phase shifts) and (a diagonal phase matrix.)

i.e., the diagonal phase matrix separate from Givens rotations. Perhaps some rewording could help?
> decomposes a unitary into a sequence of Givens rotation gates with phase shifts as well as a diagonal phase matrix.

> * A new method called `qml.qchem.givens_decomposition` has been added, which decomposes a unitary into a sequence

Author: > Also, the proceeding code example can probably just all go in a pycon environment sweat_smile

:+1:  here's how it looks now

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/49409390/219677381-3d9046ff-0b39-489f-8b61-4d0497ad1fed.png)

> * A new method called `qml.qchem.givens_decomposition` has been added, which decomposes a unitary into a sequence

Author: > Line 290 suggestion for consistency:
>
> > A new template called BasisRotation has been added, which performs a basis transformation defined by a set of
>
> @josh146 is the preferred convention here to prefix everything with `qml.`? :thinking:

I prefer we prefix everything with the correct path so that users can easily access simply using `import pennylane as qml`, however I don't think it's worth the effort to make the change this time :sweat_smile:

  4: ─────────────────╰RY(0.81)─╰SWAP─────────────────╰RY(0.06)─╰SWAP─────────────────┤  State
  ```

<h3>Improvements</h3>

<h4>Add new improvements here</h4>

> <h4>Pulse programming</h4>

Author: I'm neutral. For large features like this, it makes sense to me for the "headline" stuff to live in the new features section, and some of the supporting additions to live in the improvements.

I added these categories to improvements, but might not do it next time since I don't think it's worth the added work :laughing:

  DeviceArray(0., dtype=float32)
  ```

<h4>Operations and batching</h4>

* A new function `dot` has been added to compute the dot product between a vector and a list of operators.
  [(#3586)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3586)

  ```pycon
  >>> coeffs = np.array([1.1, 2.2])
  >>> ops = [qml.PauliX(0), qml.PauliY(0)]
  >>> qml.dot(coeffs, ops)
  (1.1*(PauliX(wires=[0]))) + (2.2*(PauliY(wires=[0])))
  >>> qml.dot(coeffs, ops, pauli=True)
  1.1 * X(0) + 2.2 * Y(0)
  ```

> * `qml.evolve` returns the evolution of an `Operator` or a `ParametrizedHamiltonian`.

Author: For me, the dream would be that the changelog allows you to click on the `qml.evolve` and it will take you to the relevant place in the docs - which removes some of the uncertainty around whether we should have `qml.` or something else.

This is already possible in the main PL docs, and the changelog now lives in the PL docs - but the `.md` version of the changelog on GH may not look great.

  `Observable`. This allows it to return valid generators from `SymbolicOp` and `CompositeOp` classes.
  [(#3485)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3485)

* The `qml.equal` function has been extended to compare `Prod` and `Sum` operators.
  [(#3516)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3516)

* `qml.purity` is added as a measurement process for purity
  [(#3551)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3551)

* In-place inversion has been removed for qutrit operations in preparation for the
  removal of in-place inversion.
  [(#3566)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3566)

* Moved `qml.utils.sparse_hamiltonian` function to `~.Hamiltonian.sparse_matrix` method.
  [(#3585)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3585)

* The `PauliSentence.operation()` method has been improved to avoid instantiating an `SProd` operator when
  the coefficient is equal to 1.
  [(#3595)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3595)

* Allow batching in all `SymbolicOp` operators, which include `Exp`, `Pow` and `SProd`.
  [(#3597)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3597)

> * `Sum` and `Prod` operations now have broadcasted operands.

Author: Yes looks like this was part of @AlbertMitjans's broadcasting work - would you roll them into one?

> * `Sum` and `Prod` operations now have broadcasted operands.

Reviewer: I think let's leave them separate actually. One has improvements for three classes, the other has improvements for 2/3 of them.

  [(#3611)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3611)

* Implemented the XYX single-qubit unitary decomposition.
  [(#3628)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3628)

* All dunder methods now return `NotImplemented`, allowing the right dunder method (e.g. `__radd__`)
  of the other class to be called.
  [(#3631)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3631)

* The `qml.GellMann` operators now include their index when displayed.
  [(#3641)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3641)

* All `Operator`'s input parameters that are lists are cast into vanilla numpy arrays.
  [(#3659)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3659)

* Added `qml.ops.ctrl_decomp_zyz` to compute the decomposition of a controlled single-qubit operation given
  a single-qubit operation and the control wires.
  [(#3681)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3681)

* `qml.pauli.is_pauli_word` now supports `Prod` and `SProd` operators, and it returns `False` when a
  `Hamiltonian` contains more than one term.
  [(#3692)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3692)

> * `qml.pauli.pauli_word_to_string` now supports `Prod`, `SProd` and `Hamiltonian` operators.

Author: Yes :thinking: This looks ok to me though, since we're highlighting two separate improvements - they just happen to come from the same PR.

Would you recommend to merge them into one?

> * `qml.pauli.pauli_word_to_string` now supports `Prod`, `SProd` and `Hamiltonian` operators.

Reviewer: Nope! Just wanted to flag it. That's fine if we leave them separate

  [(#3692)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3692)

* `Controlled` can now decompose single qubit target operations more effectively using the ZYZ
  decomposition.
  [(#3726)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3726)

 * The `qchem.Molecule` class raises an error when the molecule has an odd number of electrons or 
   when the spin multiplicity is not 1.
   [(#3748)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3748)

> * `qml.qchem.basis_rotation` now accounts for spin, allowing it to perform Basis Rotation Groupings

Author: Thanks, fixed!

  `qml.gradients.SUPPORTED_GRADIENT_KWARGS`.
  [(#3526)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3526)

* The `numpy` version has been constrained to `<1.24`.
  [(#3563)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3563)

* Support for two-qubit unitary decomposition with JAX-JIT has been added.
  [(#3569)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3569)

* `qml.math.size` now supports PyTorch tensors.
  [(#3606)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3606)

* Most quantum channels are now fully differentiable on all interfaces.
  [(#3612)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3612)

* `qml.math.matmul` now supports PyTorch and Autograd tensors.
  [(#3613)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3613)

* Add `qml.math.detach`, which detaches a tensor from its trace. This stops
  automatic gradient computations.
  [(#3674)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3674)

* Add `typing.TensorLike` type.
  [(#3675)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3675)

* `QuantumMonteCarlo` template is now JAX-JIT compatible when passing `jax.numpy` arrays to the template.
  [(#3734)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3734)

> * `DefaultQubitJax` now supports evolving the state vector when executing `ParametrizedEvolution`

Author: Good spot, I've moved it!

  gates.
  [(#3743)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3743)

* `SProd.sparse_matrix` now supports interface-specific variables with a single element as the `scalar`.
  [(#3770)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3770)

> * Validation has been added on gradient keyword arguments when initializing a QNode — if unexpected keyword arguments are passed,

Author: Thanks, fixed!

>   be run.

Author: Thanks, updated!

  [(#3587)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3587)

* The parameter-shift derivative of variances saves a redundant evaluation of the
  corresponding unshifted expectation value tape, if possible
  [(#3744)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3744)

<h4>Next generation device API</h4>

* The `apply_operation` single-dispatch function is added to `devices/qubit` that applies an operation
  to a state and returns a new state.
  [(#3637)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3637)

> * The `preprocess` function is added to `devices/qubit` that validates, expands, and transforms a batch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `preprocess` function has been added to `devices/qubit`, which validates, expands, and transforms a batch
```

  of `QuantumTape` objects to abstract preprocessing details away from the device.
  [(#3708)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3708)

> * The `create_initial_state` function is added to `devices/qubit` that returns an initial state for an execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `create_initial_state` function has been added to `devices/qubit`, which returns an initial state for an execution.
```

  [(#3683)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3683)

> * The `simulate` function is added to `devices/qubit` that turns a single quantum tape into a measurement result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `simulate` function has been added to `devices/qubit`, which turns a single quantum tape into a measurement result.
```

  The function only supports state based measurements with either no observables or observables with diagonalizing gates.
  It supports simultanous measurement of non-commuting observables.
  [(#3700)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3700)

> * The `ExecutionConfig` data class has been added.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A data class called `ExecutionConfig` class has been added.
```

More details needed maybe?

  [(#3649)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3649)

* The `StatePrep` class has been added as an interface that state-prep operators must implement.
  [(#3654)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3654)

* `QubitStateVector` now implements the `StatePrep` interface.
  [(#3685)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3685)

* `BasisState` now implements the `StatePrep` interface.
  [(#3693)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3693)

* `QubitStateVector` now implements the `StatePrep` interface.
  [(#3685)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3685)

* `BasisState` now implements the `StatePrep` interface.
  [(#3693)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3693)

<h4>Data</h4>

* Writing Hamiltonians to a file using the `data` module has been improved by employing a condensed writing format.
  [(#3592)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3592)

* Lazy-loading in the `Dataset.read()` method is more universally supported.
  [(#3605)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3605)

> <h3>Breaking changes</h3>

Reviewer: Note to myself to make changes manually to "Breaking Changes" and "deprecations" — github won't let me here 😢
